New contrib (#3269)
knative/docs: CONTRIBUTING.adoc

:toc:
:toc-placement!:

= Contributing to knative/docs

toc::[]

> *First off, thanks for taking the time to contribute!*

Reviewer: Love the thank you!

. If the PR involves significant technical changes, for example new features, or new and changed sample code, the PR is assigned to a Subject Matter Expert (SME), typically an engineer working on Knative, for technical review and approval.
. When both the technical writers and SMEs are satisfied with the quality of the writing and the technical accuracy of the content, the PR can be merged. A PR requires two labels before it can merge: `lgtm` and `approved`.
* The SME is responsible for reviewing the technical accuracy and adding the `lgtm` label.
* The https://github.com/knative/docs/blob/master/OWNERS_ALIASES[Knative technical writers] are who provide the `approved` label when the content meets quality, clarity, and organization standards (see link:#style-guide[Style Guide]).

We appreciate contributions to the docs, so if you open a PR we will help you get it merged. You can also post in the `#docs` https://knative.slack.com/[Slack channel] to get input on your ideas or find areas to contribute before creating a PR.

> == Getting involved

Reviewer: Should this be nearer the top?

Reviewer: That being said, I really like this section

Author: I can swap it with reporting issues, but the CoC and CLA parts seem like they probably belong before this section, since those will be roadblocks to getting a PR submitted.

Author: lol, I thought this was referring to "sending a PR" vs "filing an issue".

See my comment on the PR that there are 3 purposes to this doc:

1. How-To doc for quick hit-and-run PRs / issues from people familiar with GitHub
2. Tutorial on how to contribute for newbies, possibly without GitHub experience
3. Reference documentation for seasoned contributors

This is the start of the "tutorial" section. Other ideas for structuring the content are welcome, but I expect that "group 1" will look at the TOC and first 3-4 paragraphs in `CONTRIBUTING.md` and jump if they don't see what they are looking for.

There are a couple of different ways to get started with contributing to the Knative documentation:

* Look for a https://github.com/knative/docs/labels/kind%2Fgood-first-issue[Good First Issue] in the backlog.

> * Try out Knative and send us feedback. For example, run through the link:./docs/install/[install guides] and then try link:./docs/serving/getting-started-knative-app.md[Getting Started with Knative Serving] or link:./docs/eventing/getting-started.md[Getting Started With Eventing].

Reviewer: How do they send us feedback? Maybe send them to the #user-experience channel?? *shameless self plug*

Author: How about filing an issue with the friction log attached? With that said, I defer to your preferences.

Reviewer: That feels like a big lift for a new user, until it becomes unwieldy, I am ok with folks coming to UX channel and yelling at us!

+
Keep a https://devrel.net/developer-experience/an-introduction-to-friction-logging[friction log] of your experience and then use that to open your first set of PRs. Examples:
** What was difficult for you?
** Did you stumble on something because the steps weren’t clear?
** Was a dependency not mentioned?

*A few pointers and other considerations*

* Think about how you can improve the documentation as a whole. For example, how can you fix the issue you found so that others don’t run into the same challenges?
* Are there multiple places the issue could be fixed?
** Are there other pages that you should apply your update?
** Would it help if there was a link to more or related information on a page? On a related page?

> * Was the title or description misleading? Did you expect to find something different in that docs section?

Reviewer: I think you could probably remove this for the sake of brevity? Not that it isn't helpful, it's just already a long doc and this isn't the most valuable bit

Author: SGTM; this was copy-pasta from the old doc, like the other two areas that I commented needed a pass.

Reviewer: sick

The Working Group meetings are used to discuss documentation strategy and policy; we expect individual PR review to happen mostly asynchronously via GitHub, and https://slack.knative.dev[Slack].

=== Team interface

Documentation is a collaboration between several different disciplines, including engineers writing code, technical writers providing clarity and structure, product managers and marketers providing vision and comparisons, and readers who may contribute ideas and requests for clarification or additional edits.

With many different types of contributors, it’s useful to establish a ``team API'' or process for the contributors interacting. Note that this ``API contract'' is a living document, and records the current best practices for operating efficiently across timezones without requiring too much coordination.

Generally, we expect the tech writing team to own much of the process and results of the documentation process, harnessing the energy of other contributors and using tech writers as expert resources to improve the quality of existing documentation rather than writing content from scratch.

> 

Reviewer: I am a little confusion about the inclusion of this bit... this doc is meant to be for folks who are new to contributing, yeah? 

This is important, just not sure it goes here...?

Author: This is leading into "3. Process documentation for existing contributors (reference)", but I can drop it.

== Workflow

There are roughly two workflows: writing / contributing new content, and refining and reviewing existing content.

=== New Content

We expect most new content to be written by the subject matter expert (SME) which would be the contributor who actually worked on the feature or example.

When writing new content, keep the following in mind:

* Write one <<type of documentation>> per page.
* If possible, follow the style/template of other documents of the same type.

> * Focus mostly on technical correctness; structure and language should be roughly correct, but don't need heavy review.

Reviewer: Might want to mention at this point that the content will be reviewed by tech writers?

Reviewer: "...but don't need heavy review, tech writers in the Docs WG have you covered on that front."

Author: Given the rest of the context (refining existing content mentioned before and after this section), do we need to repeat that there will be a separate workflow that will clean up the structure and language?

Reviewer: I guess not! defer to you :) I think it's good either way

The goal of adding new content is to get technically correct documentation into the repo before it is lost. Tech Writers may provide some quick guidance on getting documentation into the correct location, but won't be providing a detailed list of items to change.

=== Refining and Reviewing Content

> Once the raw documentation has made it into the repo, tech writers and other communications experts will review and revise the documentation to make it easier to consume. This will be done as a second PR; it's often easier for the tech writers to clean up or rewrite a section of prose than to teach an engineer what to do, and most engineers would prefer to get back to working on code.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Once the raw documentation has made it into the repo, tech writers and other communications experts will review and revise the documentation to make it easier to consume. This will be done as a second PR; it's often easier for the tech writers to clean up or rewrite a section of prose than to teach an engineer what to do, and most engineers trust the wordsmithing the tech writers produce more than their own.
```

Reviewer: I like what Scott is going for here. This came up in Docs WG today and it seems to me it's best to leave the wordsmithing to the wordsmithers :D

Reviewer: Maybe something like "rewrite a section of prose than to teach an engineer what to do, and if they don't have any clarifying questions they will commit changes for style and clarity"

Author: Thanks, I like Scott's version much better.

When revising the content, the tech writer will create a new PR and send it to the original author to ensure that the content is technically correct; they may also ask a few clarifying questions, or add details such as diagrams or notes if needed. It's not necessarily expected that tech writers will actually execute the steps of a tutorial -- it's expected that the SME is responsible for a working tutorial or how-to.

== Tech Writer Guide

=== Type of documentation

Keep in mind the audience (Developers or Administrators) and type of document when organizing and reviewing documentation. See https://documentation.divio.com/ for a more in-depth discussion of documentation types.

=== Documentation Structure

TODO: link to intended documentation layout. A general warning about https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Conway%27s_law[Conway's Law]: documents will naturally tend to be distributed by team that produced them. Try to fight this, and organize documents based on where the _reader_ will look for them. (i.e. all tutorials together, maybe with indications as to which components they use, rather than putting all serving tutorials in one place)

> In some cases, the right place for a document may not be on the docs website -- a blog post, documentation within a code repo, or a vendor site may be the right place. Be generous with offering to link to such locations; documents in the main documentation come with an ongoing cost of keeping up to date.

Reviewer: This is fine for now! May even want to remove the TODO and leave starting at "A general..."

Author: No, I want the TODO to make it clear that we don't have a doc laying out the intended information architecture.

Reviewer: ack

=== Branches

Knative attempts to https://github.com/knative/community/blob/master/mechanics/RELEASE-VERSIONING-PRINCIPLES.md[support the last 4 releases]. By default, new documentation should be written on the `master` branch and then cherry-picked to the release branches if needed. Note that the default view of https://knative.dev/ is of the most recent release branch, which means that changes to `master` don't show up unless explicitly cherrypicked. This also means that documentation changes for a release _should be made during the development cycle_, rather than at the last minute or after the release.

> The https://github.com/kubernetes/test-infra/tree/master/prow/external-plugins/cherrypicker[`/cherrypick` tool] can be use to automatically pull back changes from `master` to previous releases if necessary.

Reviewer: This is useful information, I didn't know this and have been manually cherrypicking when I had to do it.

Author: Yeah, I tried to collect the process/tools items that seemed to have been missed in one place for reference. Documenting the documentation process. 😁

=== Tools and Style

> Knative documentation follows the https://developers.google.com/style/[Google Developer Documentation Style Guide]. Use this as a reference for writing style questions. use it as a reference for writing style questions.

Reviewer: Looks like a duplicate sentence at the end here

Author: Removed, thanks.

* `/assign @user1 @user2` to assign an issue or PR to specific people for review or approval.
* `/lgtm` and `/approve` to approve a PR. Note that _anyone_ may `/lgtm` a PR, but only someone listed in an `OWNERS` file may `/approve` the PR. A PR needs both an approval and an LGTM -- the `/lgtm` review is a good opportunity for non-approvers to practice and develop reviewing skills. `/lgtm` is removed when a PR is updated, but `/approve` is sticky -- once applied, anyone can supply an `/lgtm`.
* Both Prow (legacy) and GitHub actions (preferred) can run tests on PRs; once all tests are passing and a PR has the `lgtm` and `approved` labels, Prow will submit the PR automatically.
* You can also use Prow to manage labels on PRs with `/kind ...`, `/good-first-issue`, or `/area ...`

> * See <<branches>> for details on the `/cherrypick` command.

Reviewer: SO useful. prow has unwritten rules, great to have them here.

Author: There's actually a lot of documentation at https://github.com/kubernetes/test-infra/tree/master/prow (and for each plugin), I thought that summarizing the functionality here would be better than expecting people to dig through that documentation.

[NOTE]
====
As an experimental process, tag tech writer rewritten documents with `reviewed: $DATE` (fill in the date of starting the PR). This allows finding documents which have not been reviewed with the `find` command (Mac and Linux):
[source,shell]
----
find docs -type f -exec /bin/bash -c 'head -1 {} | grep ^--- >/dev/null && grep -L reviewed: {}' \;
----
(This currently finds all documents, but as docs are reviewed, will become more useful.)

> In the future, we may also be able to use this metadata to provide freshness information on the website.

Reviewer: Erm, may want to leave this in the Docs Taskforce that's forming, feels like shoehorn of a docs process into this doc which hasn't been seen by any tech writers. 

CC: @RichardJJG @snneji

Author: SGTM, removing.

Author: But, you also have my proposal for how to manage / track review in the Git history here! 😉

Reviewer: bahahha ack

Reviewer: thoughts on this @RichieEscarez?

Reviewer 3: Building on this. If we have the other WG TLs own the triaging process of all Issues and PRs, they could be the filter for the limited writing resources that we have today and therefore "tagging" a PR or Issue when it is indeed ready (ie. completed a SME tech review) would/might streamline the process (reduce noice and allow writers to focus solely on actionable items)

====

== Engineer Guide

=== Putting your docs in the right place

There are currently two general types of Knative docs, either contributor related content, or external-facing user content.

==== Contributor-focused content

* _Documentation_: Includes content that is component specific and relevant only to contributors of a given component. Contributor focused documentation is located in the corresponding `docs` folder of that component’s repository. For example, if you contribute code to the Knative Serving component, you might need to add contributor focused information into the `docs` folder of the https://github.com/knative/serving/tree/master/docs/[knative/serving repo].

* _Code samples_: Includes contributor related code or samples. Code or samples that are contributor focused also belong in their corresponding component’s repo. For example, Eventing specific test code is located in the https://github.com/knative/eventing/tree/master/test[knative/eventing tests] folder.

> ==== User-focused content

Reviewer: Hey shouldn't we mention docs that are generated from code comments? Remember the kerfuffle with the serving docs I was trying to improve?

Author: Adding that to the tech writer guide under "Documentation Structure".
